There are times your opponents may try to interact with you and normally the best time to do that is with magda's trigger on the stack when trying to combo off.

If you have the spare untapped artifacts or the treasures in order to use the ability of Magda, Brazen Outlaw to tutor more untapped artifacts to field you can protect yourself with Clock of Omens

The most simple way you can protect your win is by activating Magda, Brazen Outlaw again and continuing your combo on top of your own activation, or using that activation to help restart your combo. The only way this is not possible is with Trickbind or any other interaction with split second such as Sudden Shock

Otherwise you basically you can put as many Clock of Omens activations on the stack on top of their interaction attempt in order to allow you to still combo off over the top of this attempt at interacting. This is why interaction is essentially futile against a Magda that has infinite tapped treasures since they can just get extra untapped artifacts to allow them to restart their combo.

When an opponent interacts at the point where the Magda treasure trigger is on the stack which is before the initial resolution of the Clock of Omens activation that untaps your artifact dwarf you will have to get three untapped artifacts in order to attempt to restart your combo. This is because it takes one Clock of Omens activation to untap your artifact dwarf and then another untapped artifact to be used in conjunction with your artifact dwarf to restart your Clock of Omens combo. Interaction attempts are normally something people do to attempt to stop you on your first attempt to start your Clock Of Omens combo or they are silly and attempt it when you are trying to restart your combo after generating infinite tapped treasures and getting Roaming Throne or Maskwood Nexus and Xorn.

Some pilots are opting to use Battered Golem lines more often since as long as you have a non-zero board state there should be ways to force extra interaction. For every untapped dwarf you have when you start the line you have a second win attempt forcing another interaction attempt from your opponents which is a lot less of a requirement in many cases than the three artifacts you need for each interaction attempt when trying to combo off with Clock of Omens



Question 1: Why don’t we run X piece of “Fast Mana”?
Why are some pilots not running Mox Amber? Mox Diamond? Chrome Mox? Mana Vault? Jeweled Lotus? Simian Spirit Guide? Rite of Flame?

This question, or these questions I should say get asked quite often because the variance in fast mana played among decks is quite high and the reasoning to include or leave things out is not cut and dry.

This has a lot more to do with deck building philosophies and in most cases is a personal preference oriented decision rather than one that purely numbers can dictate. How things “feel” to the individual pilot matters and how they want their deck to be tuned matters just as much, be it that they want to be turbo, mid range, hard stax etc.

Mox Amber

Mox Amber

Most variants of the deck as it currently stands do not run many legendary creature outside of our commander, most lists are now off of Gimli of the Glittering Caves and Glóin, Dwarf Emissary and seemingly only “turbo oriented” lists are still on Ragavan, Nimble Pilferer. This means on average you’re on 1-3 legendary creatures with the only one that seemingly has been adopted by a majority of lists being Magda, the Hoardmaster. The severe lack of legendary creatures makes it very unlikely you’re able to use Mox Amber as a means of recasting your commander, which is the main downside to this particular piece of fast mana.

Regardless of deck variant you have a 7% chance to get it in your opening hand excluding mulligan math, when combined with the chance to get a legendary creature when most lists are only running one or two ends up being close to 1% if you push out the amount of cards seen to ten which includes the first few turns of the game. The more legendaries you run the higher this number becomes but it's still relatively insignificant since it only jumps to as high as 4% if you’re running all potentially relevant legendary creatures.

Although not being able to use this to recast our commander is a huge downside, the upside of it being active while our commander is so readily available most games can be hard to ignore for some pilots, especially if they are on “faster” deck variants. While that can be very useful we are also mono-red so our lack of card draw also must be considered when thinking about how important that extra mana may be going into the mid game if its not going to help us recast our commander, but even then a majority of lists are still running enough interaction that has a low mana value (1-2) that a single extra mana available can in some situations really make a difference.

Magda is the most likely thing to be removed, which is very relevant to how often Mox Amber is going to be active and must be taken into heavy consideration especially if the meta is running more single target removal in its current iteration.

At the very least this is a 0 mana artifact that can act as a part of protecting our Clock of Omens combo though. So even if it doesn’t help us re-cast our commander when we do have her out and we are attempting to combo off with Clock of Omens this might also put you over the amount of artifacts required on field to re-start your loop and win over the top of their interaction attempt.

Chrome Mox

Chrome Mox

The main downside to this is that you must pitch a red card. That being said with the release of Modern Horizons 3 we got two more MDFCs that will likely end up in most variants of the deck making our density of red cards that we “can do without” slightly higher.

Part of the issue though is that the card disadvantage you get from playing this can hurt quite bad, maybe not quite as bad as pitching Force of Will to your Gemstone Caverns but because of our deck’s main game plan it requires very specific starting hands for this to not feel like a “lesser of two evils” situation when choosing things to imprint. Interaction is very important for us to make sure that pesky Opposition Agent or Drannith Magistrate doesn’t just shut us out of participating in the game or at the very least make it much harder to win. Our creatures are very important as they are the main way we generate the resources we need in order to get to the point where we can combo off and win and our Artifacts with the exception of Cursed Mirror don’t fit the bill… and artifacts can’t be used as an imprint target for Chrome Mox anyway even if they have a “red pip”.

That being said, most pilots agree that this is a “necessary evil” to maintain the ability to still have the turbo style starting hands available in more combinations of cards. Afterall most decks are on 40+ red cards unlike our land count which is much lower by comparison.

At the very least this is a 0 mana artifact that can act as a part of protecting our Clock of Omens combo though.

Mox Diamond

Mox Diamond

This card is a lot harder for some pilots to reason themselves into playing.

The main reason for this is that you must discard a land in order to turn this on otherwise it goes straight to the graveyard via state based action.

Most decks are on 25-31 lands so depending on the rest of your starting hand it may potentially be difficult to warrant going down the land in order to have an artifact that can be destroyed by someone’s Gorilla Shaman or Dauntless Dismantler. While that sorta artifact destruction isn’t very common in the format there are still some decks that you need to worry about it being a potential casualty of war… mostly to decks running Dauntless Dismantler as this shares a mana value with our treasure tokens, or green decks running things like Force of Vigor.

Similar to Chrome Mox though it can indeed add some depth to your opening hands which are keepable and in the same vein are also more “turbo oriented.” This is the primary rationale behind running the card, that while going down a land can suck it can make a second seven or even your “six” more appealing with an extra land over the idea of going down further especially if the rest of the hand is able to set up a board state or interact quite a bit.

Unlike Mox Amber and Chrome Mox though this cannot be cast and stay on the field regardless, but because of that it can be helpful for lines we may want to use when combined with Goblin Welder or Goblin Engineer to remove specific stax pieces we are running to allow a win such as Grafdigger’s Cage or Null Rod.

Mana Vault

Mana Vault is something that over time has seen more inclusions across all deck variants. I’d like to say its adoption rate is closer to 90% now compared to where it was a year ago.

It essentially acts as a 1 cost ritual for 3 colorless which can be quite impactful since most deck variants sit around 30% of it’s cards as artifacts and about 10-15% more of it’s cards with at least 2 colorless required to cast it. It also lets you very easily cast up to a 5 drop on turn 2 with no other “fast mana” which can be important for some deck variants.

All variants can use 2 colorless early in the game and the downside of losing 1 HP per turn cycle is next to nothing in CEDH since a majority of games end earlier rather than later as far as amount of turns go.

So regardless of if you want to be playing early stax or simply getting some of your 3-5 drops out such as Magus of the Moon, Imperial Recruiter, Roaming Throne or The One Ring, Mana Vault lets you potentially get that push forward to either slow the game down or potentially present a win earlier.

Some pilots don’t like this card though since so much of the deck itself is on the lower end CMC/Mana Value wise and playing on curve is more along the lines of what this deck ends up doing a lot of the time.

Simian Spirit Guide & Rite of Flame

Simian Spirit Guide has inherent upside over any of the other ritual cards that “give one extra mana” as it doesn’t actually get cast to generate the mana and rather just requires it be exiled. It does have the downside of being card disadvantage in exchange for a small bit of acceleration which may or may not help much depending on the hand you’ve been dealt. It also has the upside of being able to hide you have interaction available such as Red Elemental Blast

Rite of Flame on the other hand requires it be cast and you have to use mana to cast it. This is susceptible to Mental Misstep which can be back breaking. It also has the downside of being card disadvantage as well, just like Simian Spirit Guide]. Unlike Simian Spirit Guide it is unfortunately sorcery speed only.

These types of effects are good to get around early Drannith Magistrate as well and can help you play a 3 or 4 drop on turn 2. In general though it requires very specific types of hands to really be a potential optimal play. A generic downside though is that it gives opponents a potential opportunity for a 2-for-1 and telegraphs that what you are casting may be important or worth countering.

Some pilots compare these cards to Lotus Petal and that's a great comparison especially to Simian Spirit Guide. The thing that Lotus Petal gives you that these other cards do not is that while it costing 0 is great the differentiator is that it can sit on field until it needs to be used, which can do something like bait a dockside earlier than someone might want to normally play it which we can then use as a copy target with our Cursed Mirror or effect like Heat Shimmer if you’re deck variant is on that. The biggest difference though is that this has positive interactions with both Goblin Welder and Goblin Engineer, primarily with Welder as it gives us another tutor target that can go right to the graveyard if we can sacrifice it to be used for our game ending combos. Petal also is part of combos with Elixir of Immortality to let us generate infinite untapped treasures through Grafdigger’s Cage. So Lotus Petal compared to the other two similar effects has so much more versatility and also dodges Mental Misstep.

Jeweled Lotus

Jeweled Lotus like Mana Vault has received a higher adoption rate over the past year.

One of the biggest issues for our deck is Drannith Magistrate and Jeweled Lotus gives another way to potentially dodge the Drannith. Turn 1 Magda is not always the play we want to make because attacking with her has more inherent risk than many other commanders, at least if we don’t have access to fast mana to let us play multiple things on our first turn. We’d normally rather be playing a 1 drop dwarf or two that can be used to attack on the following turn without risking the ability to make treasure itself by losing our commander.

Just like Mana Vault part of the reason this wasn’t really ran as often was that playing on curve tends to be what this deck tends to do more often than not and at first Magda wasn’t being removed nearly as consistently which made Jeweled Lotus less practical. That being said as time has gone on Magda is being removed on sight similar to Winota so potentially having access to Jeweled Lotus in the mid game can help quite a bit on top of the turn 1 play it can provide.

This card also functions the same way as Lotus Petal in the above example in regards to the welder lines and being able to put itself into the graveyard after being tutored to allow easier access to something in the graveyard to start your combo.

Jeska’s Will

Jeska’s Will - “JWill”

For a LONG time this was a staple to every variant of the deck. As time has gone there have been quite a few pilots that have opted to move away from JWill. Often the conversation comes up about why this card isn’t in some lists so I want to go through some of the reasoning as to why you may or may not run this.

As far as reasons to run this it has two potentially powerful effects. Based on the amount of cards our opponents have in hand we make red mana equal to the highest amount. The floor for this is normally going to be a pay 3 mana to generate 4 with the ceiling being quite high as there are plenty of times where an opponent may have 10 or more cards in hand. This can provide quite a bit of acceleration and potentially let us dump our hand or gain access to the mana to play things like Portal to Phyrexia or God-Pharaoh's Statue. It also gives us the ability to exile 3 cards from the top of our library and give us access to playing them, when combined with the potential mana available from the other mode this can be quite the potential boon to our boardstate. Decks where these situations may be most fruitful are ones with a higher density of low cost stax pieces since you may potentially be able to generate a board state more beneficial to you.

Like many red cards though there is some inherent risk behind playing Jwill. It attracts quite a bit of attention, especially when opponents have a lot of cards in hand, and because of the mode where it allows you to exile cards there is reason to counter the JWill itself rather than waiting for the next spell like you might for some tutors. When we are allowed to resolve this though if we are only making say 5 mana, if that's all that is available to us we very well might not be able to cast multiple things from exile and it's especially bad if we are exiling potentially important things… hitting both Maskwood Nexus and Clock of Omens as an example with minimal mana available is always a bad situation. You also only get access to both modes if Magda is out, so while it can be used to help generate the mana to re-play Magda if she's been killed a few times it still requires a very specific gamestate for that to be the case and the “floor” for the card doesn’t really do much for you since it potentially just turns into a more expensive Rite of Flame.

Simply put the floor for the card is quite low (becoming Rite of Flame) and the ceiling, while it may seem high, is also way too gamestate specific. When you can get close to “optimal” value from playing it you’re also relying on luck in multiple facets just to get that “optimal” value. This card does not “win the game” as its ceiling unless you luck into an A+B combo with enough mana and the odds of that are VERY low.

This card is also a relatively dead card if you’re either sandbagging playing your commander or if Drannith Magistrate is on the field.

Question 2: What are Magda’s best win conditions/combos?
Realistically this is a hard question to answer.

A generic answer is going to be that the best win conditions are going to be the ones that can be added or exist in the way you’ve built your deck with as few combo specific cards as you can add. Most of the time this has to do with the “card packages” you opt into playing and how those packages allow you to present wins.

Deck variants and how you want to play the deck itself change what is “best” as they have to be suited for your build and play style. Some pilots like the safety of Elixir of Immortality and others swear it is just losing overall card quality in the deck to run it.

Some deck variants even go so far as to ignore all other “combo starters” outside of Clock of Omens and focus entirely around building board states where when that comes in it can be protected when you attempt your combo rather than having extra lines that may win through specific stax pieces like Null Rod where you NEED specific pieces to do so. This also means not running effective stax pieces (like that Null Rod) that may be hard to remove for this type of deck variant and specifically having tools that allow you to still protect your win attempt them with your chosen main combo line that lets you fight through extremely important stax pieces like Grafdigger’s Cage that shut down MANY win conditions in the format.

The honest truth of the matter is… when you get to infinite treasures it doesn’t matter how you win, just that you can win. When you get to this board state ideally you should want at least two or three ways that can be pivoted into should somehow one be stopped but a lot of our win-cons have extra layers of protection you can add to ensure that you can win over the top of anything that isn’t at Split Second speed. Another reason we normally have multiple win-cons is because some combo lines simply do not work through specific stax pieces, so we either have to add extra lines to win through them or we have to add extra ways to help remove them.

An example would be that you’re trying to win with Goblin Welder and Twinshot Sniper where someone tries to exile the twinshot sniper in your graveyard…you simply use your Clock of Omens to untap your Goblin Welder that has been made into an artifact since most lines require it to be an artifact already to function and activate the ability again over the top of their attempt to remove any piece that's part of the combo line.

Winning with Magda in some ways can be a puzzle depending on the situation, but there's almost always a way to do it. If you can’t win at instant speed for some reason, you can almost always halt opponents from winning by bringing most of your stax pieces into play. Once those stax pieces are in play you can opt to “draw loop” to gain access to some interaction and they will have to fight through hell just to attempt a win or stop yours on the next turn.

Question 3: Why are dragons so uncommon now?
Dragons, while uncommon currently, will still be seen from time to time depending on how lists are built. In the past things like Utvara Hellkite, Bogardan Hellkite and Ancient Copper Dragon would commonly be seen as they all had their potential upsides, however over time the practical usage of these cards has come into question with new strategies and deck building possibilities showing their face.

Utvara Hellkite was very popular in a meta when tournaments were running 120 minute rounds. Simply having a plan of “stax the board, beat their face with a bunch of dragons” isn’t as effective when only given 75 or 80 minutes to work with unfortunately. It is still a potent card in more staxy variants of the deck, but because most deck variants in general are not on many dragons to begin with it’d take quite a few turns to get the army you might need to win.

Bogardan Hellkite was a combo piece primarily that has since been replaced with things like Twinshot Sniper. It was also part of Elixir of Immortality loops that helped generate infinite untapped treasures through Grafdigger’s Cage but since those lines were invented there have been quite a few others that have the same outcome with higher card quality or simply use other cards that already are used in the deck for varied reasons. Realistically if this isn’t being tutored it's not being cast and one of our staples Portal to Phyrexia is bad enough when it is stuck in hand, we don’t really want to increase the number of “dead cards” in hand simply to have a combo card, which you can also argue for Spine of Ish Sah but that's another topic to be discussed later. Another reason why this doesn’t see as much play is that originally it was used as a means to have a small “board wipe” of sorts, now we just rely on Portal to Phyrexia instead as it has more upsides.

Ancient Copper Dragon was seen as a way to let you 50/50 into just winning the game on its attack. This was normally done by tutoring for it on our opponent’s end step. The issue is not just that this strategy is inconsistent but rather that it requires the dragon to live to actually attack and connect for damage so it has to dodge removal and a deck having flyers to block it. On top of this Roaming Throne was introduced which when tutored at the same time in many board states just lets you threaten a win on your next turn/combat.

Things like Realm-Scorcher Hellkite (Which is arguably a strictly better version of Skarrgan Hellkite that was previously used), Scourge of Valkas and Terror of the Peaks are seen still because of their ability to end games in a simple fashion, potentially through potent stax pieces. However many pilots primarily see these specific types of dragons as “shortcut” pieces..

This idea of a shortcut piece is common when discussing win conditions that may be superfluous, especially ones that simply make your combo easier to execute or understand for your opponents. Adding cards specifically to make things easier to explain sacrifices potential card quality for that feeling of safety, similar can be said for things like Elixir of Immortality however that provides a bit more than just one thing when added to most decks which will be covered in later sections of this guide.

The potential upside to dragons outside of their ability to help us combo though is that they can provide a clock on our opponent’s life total since flyers are uncommon in the format outside of some specific commanders or hatebears and those pieces don’t often favorably trade into dragons. But a lot of lists have gone away from that “stax the board, beat down” backup plan because of the changes to tournament play over the past few years as mentioned above.

Like every other card that is added to your deck… the “why” is the most important part to answer. If you need a card to win the game because you don’t want to run a card package including Goblin Welder and win-cons through the graveyard then something like Realm-Scorcher Hellkite might be just up your ally, if you’re running Null Rod and you want a creature based win-con while you’re running Maskwood Nexus in your deck then Terror of the Peaks or Scourge of Valkas might suit your needs.

However if you’re already on other combo lines adding these types of outlets in just to simplify things may not be “optimal” but everything is up to player preference. This is also entirely based upon deckbuilding philosophies as some pilots heavily value being able to win through their own stax above all else and in this case they are no longer really “shortcuts,” while others are more of the mindset for removing the thing that is stopping the win through a variety of ways in which case they would be considered a “shortcut” and potentially not worth the slot to them.

Question 4: What's the deal with no fetch lands?
Fetch lands are something that in 60 card formats help with deck thinning, but in CEDH they are mostly there for color fixing. As we are a mono-colored deck we don’t really need color fixing and the slightest advantage you get from deck thinning is likely not normally going to be worth it.

Below is a quote describing the math behind deck thinning not really being statistically significant.

“Deck thinning can be worth it, but its effects are often overestimated. Take a 99-card deck for EDH (this can also be applied to 60-card Constructed decks and 40-card Limited decks), and say roughly 1/3 of the cards in your deck are lands. Once you’ve drawn your starting hand and are a few turns in, you’ll have around 84 cards left. If you use a fetch land to remove a single land from your deck, you’re only increasing your likelihood of drawing a non-land from 66.7% (56 non-lands out of 84) to 67.4% (56 non-lands out of 83). Considering you’re using a fetch to do this, you’re likely paying 1 life (unless you’re using something like Fabled Passage), and you really need to ask yourself if it’s worth it.” - Via: https://draftsim.com/deck-thinning-mtg

In a mono-color deck though there are a few specific cards that can make fetches worth running and those are Crucible of Worlds and Dwarven Mine .

The upside is that you can recur your fetches with Crucible of Worlds that essentially means that as long as you keep getting turns you’re going to have a much easier time recasting your commander should it continually be removed.

The downside is that you’re potentially losing out on many of the non-fetchable utility lands such as Urza’s Cave, Fomori Vault and Talon Gates of Madara among many others. On top of this you also give extra reason for your opponents to use their Opposition Agent.

Your landbase needs to be built entirely around making sure you get the most out of those fetch lands which on average means more basics that do eat into those slots for utility lands. In general you’re normally on more lands when running this kind of strategy, so that you can not only have the basics you need, but all of the fetches and land destruction lands to best put to use Crucible of Worlds.

Especially now that Magda, the Hoardmaster has been printed and is in most variants of the list it makes giving up land slots for fetches much harder as you need access to the lands that allow you to target things to commit “crimes” such as Hammerheim to maximize the value of Magda, the Hoardmaster.

Question 5: Why do we run X stax piece that can actively hurt us or turns off some of our lines?
Stax pieces such as Grafdigger’s Cage, Null Rod can be debilitating. They both prevent integral aspects of our gameplans but they also tend to be good at warping the game and preventing opponents win conditions.

While it’d be wonderful to not need to run debilitating stax pieces (and some lists do not) many pilots consider these types of stax a “necessary evil.”

To a lesser extent stax like Torpor Orb and Sphere of Resistance//Thorn of Amethyst//Damping Sphere can be problematic to our game plan but also can be integral to preventing specific win conditions or making them much tighter for our opponents allowing plenty of room for error.

Grafdigger’s Cage

Grafdigger’s Cage is a symmetrical effect that prevents creatures from entering the battlefield from libraries or graveyards. It also prevents cards from being cast from graveyards or libraries.

This particular stax piece makes it very hard to find lines that allow us to combo off. Primarily because it shuts down the ability to have creatures enter the battlefield which means that we lose access to things like Roaming Throne and Xorn that are used to bridge the gap from infinite tapped treasures to infinite untapped treasures. There's also the problem that we can’t tutor any of our other artifact dwarves to play, so our Urza’s Saga can’t get us our Universal Automaton though it can get us our Grafdigger’s Cage if we need it to. It also disables one of our alternative wincons in Battered Golem.

Most variants of the deck do have a way around this situation though. Clock of Omens is still an artifact as is Liquimetal Torque. Torque allows us to turn any dwarf we’ve played into an artifact, then that lets us go through our Clock of Omens loop to make infinite tapped treasures, then depending on decklist you either have a way to remove the Grafdigger’s Cage or have a way to make infinite untapped treasures through the Grafdigger’s Cage by using things like Grinding Station or using specific loops with Elixir of Immortality.

While at first this might seem like it prevents deck variants that win by using the graveyard alongside Goblin Welder or Goblin Engineer from functioning at a baseline it does not as both of these creature’s abilities let them remove the cage to begin their combos which makes it a non-factor. These would need to be on the field already though for that to matter as Cage does directly stop lines that require tutoring creatures. So unless you’re on an Elixir of Immortality package you’re kinda stuck finding a way to get creatures to win this primarily uses a “draw loop” to just play everything you want from hand instead of tutoring it and in this kind of a situation you should probably make sure God-Pharaoh's Statue and other stax pieces that can prevent opponents from interacting easily are on the field first.

Our opponents however aren’t as lucky. Underworld Breach is a format defining win condition currently and this prevents our opponents being able to cast things via escape. It also shuts down all “To Field” tutors such as Sissay, Weatherlight Captain ability, Kinnan, Bonder Prodigy ability and anything like Eldritch Evolution. It also stops reanimation spells that put things on field such as Lively Dirge, Reanimate and Animate Dead.

Other things this stops are things like Reality Chip, Bolas’s Citadel, Eladamri, Korvecdal, and unfortunately Power Balance. Essentially anything that lets you cast something from your library, or graveyard like Sevinne’s Reclamation flashback ability.

Another very important aspect of Grafdigger’s Cage is that there is a non-deterministic way to remove it, even without infinite untapped treasures. Namely using The One Ring in combination with the 20+ other artifacts that can be tutored allowing you to draw about half of your starting deck card total. This allows you to either draw into Battered Golem to be played and help you dig deeper or simply find your answer such as Abrade or Zoyowa’s Justice along with the mana rocks to allow these things to be cast. While this is non-deterministic it is actually relatively consistent.

Null Rod

Null Rod

This card is extremely polarizing. The one thing we need access to is generating treasures and the most common means of doing so is by using the crew ability on vehicles, which also happens to be an activated ability of an artifact. This means that game states can become difficult to navigate and get to our end goal if the board is too cluttered unless we have access to Dwarven Bloodboiler.

Magda’s ability not requiring an activated ability of an artifact means that we can potentially break parity through this stax piece. Null Rod does something that most other stax pieces do not and that is allow you to potentially out-tempo our opponents as everyone loses access to all fast mana including treasures while simultaneously preventing a multitude of prevalent win conditions in the format.

Anything involving an artifact ability is removed as an option for a win condition. This primarily affects dockside loops, underworld breach loops and most lines post Ad Nauseam as they normally have a heavy reliance on mana rocks. It also disables some sacrifice outlets that may be used in some combo lines such as Ashnod’s Altar and Phyrexian Altar while also stopping things like Birthing Pod from turning a Dargo into a Hullbreaker Horror.

In a way not being able to activate artifacts is also a boon to us due to the interaction with Treasure and Dockside Extortionist. It allows the opponents to stockpile Treasure for when they are able to remove the Null Rod with something like Chain of Vapor or a shatter. However, until an opponent is able to remove the Null Rod though it just potentially feeds the “Dockside Count” which turns any single search while a dockside is on board into a potential win for us (normally via Cursed Mirror).

Torpor Orb

Torpor Orb

Torpor does one thing, it shuts down creatures ETBs. There are quite a lot of relevant ETB effects in the format and most of them help opponents accrue value or even tutor with something like Ranger Captain of Eos to help set up specific lines. Because it stops ETBs it prevents many win conditions with reliance on them such as Thassa’s Oracle, Dockside Extortionist, Karmic Guide, Felidar Guardian and Grey Merchant of Asphodel it makes the downsides for our own deck worth it.

Most Magda deck variants don’t have many creature ETB effects. The primary tools used are Goblin Engineer, Plundering Barbarian, Dockside Extortionist and our own tutors such as Imperial Recruiter. While turning off our own ETBs isn’t great, the chances of seeing our ETB creatures is very low in general. Being able to stop our opponents from potentially being able to tutor for their Orcish Bowmaster and Dockside Extortionist while turning off Dockside’s ETB can potentially just win us games. In the games where Torpor Orb shuts off win conditions of our opponents it forces other lines or for Torpor Orb to be removed which gives a bit of information on the types of plays that might be looking to make.

Sphere Effects

Thorn of Amethyst Sphere of Resistance Damping Sphere

Sphere effects slow down spell based decks a lot more than they slow us down. While they are annoying to deal with in some situations like when you’re looking to interact or when you’re looking to play vehicles in some ways they can be a necessary evil.

Deck variants that use these are doing so because they make early advantage engines harder to deploy and slow or prevent win attempts from many archetypes. Your opponent’s Underworld Breach line becomes tighter with a normal sphere and simply not possible with something like Damping Sphere.

These effects are very simple to understand their upside, but the downside is almost always going to be that your opponents need to be able to properly threat assess and play through them. If they are too greedy often they will not be able to play the interaction they need to in order to prevent other opponents from winning, should they have lines that do happen to win through Sphere effects. This is another strength of Damping Sphere is that while it does stop specific win conditions involving many casts it does not shut down free interaction such as Force of Will to allow our opponents to stop one another.